hi everyone welcome to the webinar my
name is chris lee
i'm the instructor at launch school and
today we'll have a quick chat about
the recession or the upcoming recession
not the most fun of topics but i think a
necessary one given the current state of
the world we'll try to keep it casual
keep it light
as is our style here at logical and is
my style and we'll kick it off here with
just a quick agenda so we'll start off
with some introduction a background
there's a lot of new names in the
attendee list
there's also a lot of familiar names
which is really good a lot of students
both current and graduated from law
school
but also a lot of new names that i
haven't seen before
this webinar caught a little bit of
attention on twitter
and attracted some attendees who may not
know too much about me
or launch school so a little bit of
background and then we'll spend some
time talking about the current state of
programming
roles and then we'll get into the
recession a little bit and we'll use
this talk story format which i'll
explain in a little bit
but that's where i'm going to share a
little bit about my personal experience
going through the first recession in
and then uh the second was recession in
and then we'll wrap it up and then do
some q a so this presentation was very
difficult for me to make i had to
toss a previous draft just because it
didn't seem
extremely relevant given what's
happening today and if you're watching
the recording
in the future right now we're in the
midst at least
in the united states and for frankly
most of the world we're going through
the midst of the coronavirus the kova 19
pandemic
so the news has been pretty consistently
bleak and more and more
it looks like we're going to experience
a downturn here
but on top of an economic downturn we
also have to deal with this pandemic
so we're in very uncertain times it was
very very difficult
for me to produce some prescriptive
advice
and call it a day and frankly it was
very difficult to project what will
happen
for example i read just the other day
that projected unemployment
might get up to 30 percent which is just
an insanely high number compared to
previous recessions
so instead of trying to take that
prescriptive approach
i toss the previous talk and instead i'm
going to try to take more of a
quote-unquote talk story approach
which is really a little bit of chit
chat and bonding before any serious
conversation
i live in hawaii and here in hawaii this
is a common thing that we do
if you visit hawaii that's a phrase that
you're gonna run into talk story
so we'll take that approach a little bit
more personal a little bit less
prescriptive
a little bit more anecdotal just because
it's very very difficult to project what
will happen
and then of course we're going to map
this to what you're all interested in
which is transitioning to software
engineering how does
my experience maybe map into the next
several months or maybe even years
in terms of impact to you as you
transition to software
and i should also just take a moment to
say that this talk is primarily geared
towards
log school students and also perhaps
early career logical graduates so early
career meaning under five years
but for the most part i have logical
students in mind
who are undergoing this career
transition
but whether or not you're a student at
launch school as long as you're
interested in
transitioning into software engineering
this talk will be
useful for you now if we're gonna take a
talk story approach you have to know a
little bit about me
so just real quick i started my career
in 2002
at ibm in austin texas spent five years
as a software engineer in their software
group absolutely love
my time there and i'll talk more about
it in a bit
but after my fifth year i got bit by
their startup bug
i actually got bit before my fifth year
but i only had the courage to
quit after my fifth year spent two years
working on my own startup
which almost made it big not quite
as is the case for most startups it
didn't go ipo
the net of it was probably something
like a salary equivalent
did a little bit of consulting as well
during that time after that
spent some time at deloitte in a really
neat role in their emerging technologies
group as a sme which is
subject matter expert for everything
related to ruby haruku
ios development and then after a little
bit of time i got poached by
silicon valley in various leadership
roles team lead engineering manager
where i spent some time running teams
hiring firing
and that was out in the bay area and
then the last eight years
teaching people to code running launch
school so in total
18 years wide mix of enterprise startup
leadership roles
and i consider launch school small
business so this mix of experience is
really unique and of course
while i was going through it i was just
exploring scratching my own curiosity
not necessarily have a master plan in
mind but in hindsight it's been a near
perfect preparation for my current role
at launch school
where i'm tasked to give advice around
various software careers
so it's been really nice to be able to
lean on my personal experience
across all the various subfields in the
larger field of software engineering
and that first hand breadth of
experience has been a critical
ingredient in my ability to help
students at large school
navigate their long-term goals and i'll
just
point out my role at law school now i
think it's a really really unique role
i don't know too many people who get to
see
this breadth of salaries across the u.s
across the world
and especially as it relates to career
transitioners
and that's going to be the main point of
focus on this call
which is share some of that unique
insight working with employers who hire
people from non-computer science
backgrounds and also
working with our students who are
transitioning into software engineering
and been doing it since 2012 so across
time as well so i think this unique
perspective
is something that i can really share
with everybody here
so that's the background let's now pivot
into talking about software engineering
the various
roles in this industry there's lots of
confusion regarding these terms and
frankly they're quite overloaded and
they're used very loosely and
imprecisely by everybody the definitions
really vary depending on who you're
speaking to and there's no really
industry standard
but i just really want you to think
about this it's really about the role
that you
have at a specific company that's all
that matters
it's the combination of a role at a
company
so if i use these terms in this
presentation i'm going to try to qualify
a little bit for you so we don't get
mixed up
all right so let's take a detour here
and talk about this chart
this is pay on the vertical axis and
skill on the horizontal axis
and specifically on the horizontal axis
this is only technical skill
engineering skill that's the only skill
we're interested in so take a look at
this chart
is there anything controversial here
hopefully this chart makes sense
it just says as you level up your skill
set your pay increases in a linear way
so
there's a one-to-one correlation between
leveling up your skill
and how much you get paid not too
controversial right
most people envision a linear
relationship like this
something like this blue line the more
skills i have the higher
i should be paid and as i look at this i
think to myself
maybe right some roles that some
companies are like this
but not all so i think what a lot of
people new to software engineering a lot
of new people looking to transition
their careers what they don't think
about is that there's more than one
curve at play here
there are other lines on this curve for
example there could be another curve
here in green
that appears linear at first as you
level up your skill your pay increases
but then tapers off to some constant
after some point
why is that isn't that odd how could
that be
so i've attached a couple labels here to
give you a high level idea of
why this could be so if you want to just
take a few seconds here to think about
how come how do these labels help
explain these different curves
so i'll try to give my reasoning here to
me there's a fundamental difference in
the way that engineering-centric
company operates versus a web
consultancy
specifically there's a fundamental
difference in the way that they use
programmers in the first the
engineering-centric one
programmers are used to drive top line
growth
in the latter programmers are used to
bill out to clients
in the green curve in the web
consultancy curve it flattens out
because that's the highest the
consultancy can pay you no matter how
good you get
there's a ceiling for technical skill
right and we're assuming you don't get
promoted a cto or something like that
right and the reason is because the
business model of the web consultancy
is such that they bill you out at let's
say
200 an hour so the maximum they can pay
you
is roughly 150 an hour there's some
overhead
with regards to the office maybe
insurance and things like that
but there's a maximum number that they
can pay before they start losing money
so if you're getting paid well below
that 200 an hour
and they're billing you out at 200 an
hour they cannot afford to give you
raises
until you start to hit that ceiling and
then no matter how good you get because
they can only bill you out at 200
an hour that's it this is
different from the software engineer
curve the blue line
where the company has figured out how to
use your skills
to make more money as you get better
that translates
into making more money for the company
so the business model and how the
company uses programmers
matters a lot in terms of the pay curve
here
but it's a lot messier than just those
two curves
software is eating the world we've all
heard that and that means programmers
are in demand
everywhere and at every price point so
it doesn't take a lot of skill
a lot of programming skill to start
making money but it's actually pretty
critical that you get on the right
salary curve there because not all of
the curves
are equal and if you hop on the wrong
one it could be
very very detrimental to your growth in
the long run the differences may not be
very great at first
but after a while the differences are
dramatic
i'm going to add a couple more labels
here just to give some context for these
curves
so let's take a look at the yellow one
there it's just a horizontal line
i labeled that product manager which is
to show that
it's a role that may require some
technical skill
and pays pretty well but as you level up
your technical ability
there's no correlated growth at all and
the reason is because it's a product
role it's not a technical role
and just keep in mind this the the skill
there
only means technical skills so for
example in a product manager role
in order to grow your pay it could very
well be that
product skill or some other skills more
important than technical skill
the orange line there that i've labeled
marketing web page builder
is another one that's very very popular
and this role is one of those roles
where
a small marketing agency or marketing
department
hires a very low-cost front-end engineer
to prototype some landing page
or build some very basic functionality
on a website
all they're looking for is somebody with
some html css
javascript and maybe a little bit of
react and that's it
but as you level up there this marketing
department or marketing agency
is just not going to be able to use
those skills if you pick up a lot more
technical ability they're still only
going to demand a little bit of html css
javascript and react
so the curve there for that orange line
is really not one that
an engineering centric person should hop
on
if they're looking for career growth
from their job
okay let's take it back to salaries now
that we know there are different salary
curves
we can try to understand why software
engineers get paid so much
and when i say software engineers i'm
talking about that blue line
and the reason is because internet scale
companies have figured out a way to
convert
software engineering ability into
revenue and that's the main reason
is that software engineering can
actually result in a lot more money for
the company
engineering becomes a profit center the
goal to show these
other curves like the marketing web page
builder is to express that not
all programming roles are profit centers
and in fact i would say the majority of
programming roles
are not profit centers and here's the
thing it's not enough to even
work at a company doing programming
where engineering is a profit center
you have to be in the department that is
driving that
top line growth so we look at that
orange curve and we can see that but
there's also
less obvious roles for example if you're
a programmer for a large
regional hospital chain it's most likely
a hospital would view programming as a
cost center
you want to be an engineer who works for
engineering center company
just ask if you were a lawyer you would
want to work for a law firm
not for engineering-centric company so
most programming roles are not in that
profit center they're
cost centers most programming roles what
is the implication of that statement
if you were searching for a job at this
juncture
at that skill level and knowing that
most
jobs most programming jobs are
cost centers what is the implication
here
i think the implication is that you have
to work really really hard to separate
the signal from the noise
and to figure out how do you hop on that
blue curve
and it's super confusing and if you look
at
the options here it it means that you
really shouldn't take the highest paying
job
doesn't it that can be very very
difficult especially for someone new to
the industry
and who's just trying to figure out the
ecosystem and how everything works
very very confusing the reality is even
worse
however because the jobs with the better
salary progression curves
are actually available just a little bit
down the skills access
so at this juncture you may only see
two options available both of which have
pretty
undesirable long-term curves and this is
exactly why
i advise law school students to always
aim high
to try to get onto one of those curves
with a steep slope
and that necessarily means possibly
turning down the first
jobs that you run into and that can be
difficult saying no
to somebody who wants to give you money
but as you get better
as you learn more as you progress on
your programming journey
it's very very likely that the first
jobs you run into
will not be jobs that have a very steep
salary slope instead it's far
more likely that you run into one of
these very very numerous
low tier jobs with a very flat
salary progression slope so in this
chart that's this
orange and yellow line so just to
summarize most of the
students and people that i see who are
looking to transition to programming
have this idealized journey where
they're in a current
job that they don't like or they're
unemployed and their job is to get
their first programming role and they
don't really mind if it's not
the best but they just want to get their
foot in the door and it's okay if it's
not great
as long as they can grow and eventually
get to that amazing programming drop
right so they want to take a short-term
goal and they're gonna make a long-term
goal
and i put some nice images here to
capture this progression in people's
minds this idealized journey
and i'll be using these uh images in the
next few slides
so this is still that idealized journey
it's just like that blue line the blue
line is what people envision
i'm gonna just work my way up right
start with a low paying bad job and work
my way up
now you know that this blue line doesn't
exist
so you know i'm kind of setting you up a
little bit here
so here's the problem with that idea the
problem is really that people have this
perceived difficulty that the gap
between their current bad job and a
entry-level programming job is the
hardest hurdle to overcome in their mind
that
once they cross this threshold then the
transition from the
bad programming job to the amazing
programming job is
smooth sailing so a lot of people just
think if only i can get my foot in the
door
i just need a programming job i'll take
anything
get some experience i'll work as hard as
i can
get mentorship and i'll find my way to
that amazing programming job
the reality is actually that second jump
is
much much much more difficult and the
first jump is actually very easy
and i actually think that a lot of
coding boot camps
prey on people's misconception here
of what their first programming job
would feel like in other words they rely
on all the imagination of an amazing
programming job
except they're delivering people to an
entry-level programming job
and really leaving a lot of people sort
of in this really bad state
of now you can work your way to that
amazing programming job but
that's actually the hard part and an
example i'll
provide here is something like trying to
get paid for one's cooking skills
an entry-level programming job would be
equivalent to something like a fast
food job those are very numerous and
they're generally lower paying
and they're not too difficult to get but
we're all pretty familiar with cooking
so
i don't think there's anybody that
thinks if i work at a fast food place
i can work my way up into a michelin
star chef
at least that's not the normal path that
i would think
if your goal is to be a michelin star
chef then you would have to take a
different path maybe go to culinary
school or
study under michelin star chefs or
something like that but it definitely
wouldn't be
to go work at a fast food restaurant in
other words there's no linear
progression there
and for programming we have a very very
similar situation going on
but most people can't perceive that and
this is why at logical we have a lot of
boot camp graduates we have a lot of
people who are
currently developers or programmers
their job title is working developer
they're getting paid
to code and they're still in our program
learning to code at the same time
on paper that doesn't make any sense but
if you understand the different
salary curves and if you understand the
different types of jobs we're going
after
it makes complete sense they're now
trying to hop this
second chasm trying to bridge the gap
between step two and three
and my advice for ambitious career
transitioners is to
skip the bad programming job skip that
entry level job
so we always say a launch goal to push
yourself farther along that skill
access until you get a career launching
job
absolutely do not settle because you
might be
on the wrong career curve and like i
said before
in the coding bootcamp space i believe
this is the biggest
bait and switch that they pull on people
new to the industry
is that everybody envisions this blue
line that you're hopping on but in fact
you're hopping on
the orange line okay why are we talking
about this in a presentation about
recession so let's talk about the
recession for a bit
and i'll tie it back to what we were
talking about earlier
after this so a recession is business
cycle contraction when there is a
general decline in
in economic activity recessions
generally occur when there is a
widespread drop in spending
that's from wikipedia the short of it is
that there's no money
banks aren't lending consumers aren't
spending and corporations aren't
investing
this is triggered by many factors in the
2001-2002
downturn it was triggered by the tech
bubble 2008
was the financial crisis and right now
we have a pandemic
there's a lot of impact to everything in
a recession but i'll specifically
mention
impact to employees because that's over
that's what we care about most here
in this talk cost centers are downsized
and
that means most programming roles right
remember we said most programming roles
are not profit centers so
that means most programming roles are in
cost centers they're subject to being
downsized
profit centers receive less investment
and non-critical initiatives are just
postponed or just cut a lot of times
that's how these marketing departments
get their budget
there's some new initiative and some
executive approves
fifty thousand dollars to do it now
those are all gone
and then of course you have layoffs
layoffs happen in
all kinds of different ways a very
common manifestation of a
layoff is entire division gets cut a
vertical slice
of a company so if you think of an org
chart
some branch just gets pruned regardless
of your
rating or ranking within the company if
your
roll falls underneath that branch you're
gonna get laid off
expensive employees are also more at
risk and
of course this means more experienced
and older employees
are more impacted and cost centers as i
said earlier
these are sort of tend to get
consolidated you'll see a lot of
reorgs happening i know that when i went
through the recession in 2001 2002
every other month there was an
announcement about some big rework and
you're just wondering why that is
it doesn't seem to impact you at all but
the hr department all of a sudden is
consolidated
and one of them is redundant right so
for
an engineering company hr is the cost
center
and if you look around now you'll hear
whispers and rumors of layoffs already
happening
i'm going to just reiterate this point
again cost versus profit center
and it's really important to think of
you as a software engineer
as something that is not a cost because
costs need to be slashing cut in a
downturn
so as an engineer you have to make sure
your role is
helping the top line and it's not enough
to just be
coding at a company that views
engineering as a profit center
you actually have to be in that
department one good trick of trying to
figure out whether or not you are in a
cost or profit center
is just start asking for stuff like an
extra monitor or something like that or
a new chair
cost centers will not allow that or
require a lot of paperwork and
try to stall the request profit centers
won't bat an eyelash
it'll just be approved okay this is the
top story part
of the presentation so i'll go as far
back
as my college experience because that
leads into the first recession
so i was in college in the late 90s and
it was just an amazing time to be
in college at that time and in tech
because every company was on campus
recruiting every single one of us if you
had a little bit of programming ability
you were being recruited by the biggest
names
uh many of which still exist today so we
thought we were
invincible and then 2001 it all just
disappeared i remember coming back from
break and all of a sudden all the
companies just
disappeared and i heard rumors that
graduates a class
earlier from me actually had some offers
rescinded
the only good thing is that this
happened all in my junior year so i had
a
full year to prepare and to set myself
apart from other candidates
and it was a very very competitive
process
it went from sophomore year where
everyone's
recruiting you and it wasn't a matter of
can you get a job it was just
with what company and how much are you
going to get paid to junior year
seeing the bloodbath seeing the offers
rescinded and just working really hard
to prepare and then senior year going to
interview was like hunger games
it was very difficult fortunately i was
able to land a job
in ibm software group out in austin
and i absolutely loved that experience i
had a lot of energy coming out of
undergrad and i ran clubs i played
intramurals so
the austin campus had intramurals it was
very much
just a continuation of college for me
except that
i got paid and i could just code full
time
really for me at the time looking back i
in my mind i thought it was just a dream
come true
i loved it so much that i made a 30-year
plan and my goal was to try to reach
this title called stsm
which stood for senior technical staff
member this is a technical
title and it is an ambitious goal but it
is quite modest as well in that it's not
like cto or anything like that it's
equivalent to something like
a vice president so it's a very solid
30-year plan
you wouldn't want to aim for anything
lower than that in 30 years
and i found a mentor who was at stsm who
i really respected and adored
and everything was really great except
there were some weird signs that would
pop
up so people for example kept
congratulating me and saying hey
congrats for being hired in these tough
times and i put tough times and quotes
because
some people are being laid off it's
almost like i can't believe they hire
people while others are being laid off
so it was a little bit accusatory and a
lot of the
experienced folks seemed quite down and
i'm sure for them it must have been very
annoying to see me very energetic and
happy and enthusiastic to be there
but out of the many weird things that
happened i would
point to three that really made me
change my mind
so there were a lot more than three
there was like a constant stream of
reorgs
and sort of a down cast atmosphere and
frankly a lot of people were just very
fearful
but these three events in particular
stuck out to me so first of all my
mentor was laid off
so i was pretty upset by that but i was
actually
more upset that he was surprised by it
in that he felt very betrayed
and he was caught off guard frankly by
by the layoff now you could say that's
his being
ignorant but but still i can see that it
really hurt him it really affected him
and indirectly it affected me too so
from that experience
the advice that i took away from that
was you have to have loyalty to people
but not organizations and you can say
well what is an
organization other than people well
that's true but people change jobs
people can leave their roles and i feel
like with my mentor he conflated the two
he conflated the people in the
organization for the organization itself
and when i saw that the organization
didn't reciprocate that loyalty it
really
caught him by surprise and i think it's
really devastating especially
when you've given 30 plus years the
second event that happened that
again affected me a little bit was
seeing a very high performing
executive tracked person somebody who is
identified as
fast-tracked on the executive path being
caught in one of these
large vertical layoffs where an entire
division got laid off
so this is somebody that i knew who was
not
in software he was in a different
non-technical division
but because i knew him through
basketball we were very casual and
we would share a lot of information that
normally in the normal course of work we
maybe wouldn't because we're not in the
same department
but i remember that he had expressed to
me how excited he was that he got a one
one is the highest ranking you can get
and you get a rating every year
and only five percent of the company
gets once and these are very coveted
you get big raises and bonuses if you
get a one
very very difficult rating to get so he
got at one and was very excited
i remember him telling me about it i
walked by his office one day
and asked him how he was doing and he
said that he had been laid off
and that really shocked me because i
knew how well he was doing at the
company and i knew that he was somebody
that
higher level executives had identified
as somebody to be you know usher up the
ranks
and i said how could they lay off you
and he said no
my entire division's laid off doesn't
matter your ranking doesn't matter your
rating
and these are really really difficult to
see prevent
and recover from because when a whole
division is laid off
everybody's working their network and
looking for jobs
so in that example it's the marketing
department and so all of a sudden
dozens of people dozens of marketing
people with experience are looking for
the same jobs so the advice i got from
that is
always have a pulse on the market and
you really have to rely on your network
and it's important to start building
that network and having
a feel for the market as soon as you can
and the last event
that really affected me was somebody who
was laid off and then came back to
volunteer and i found this really
shocking
because ibm is not a non-profit there's
no do good mission
it's making money and the reason for
that is because
i realized that this person was at the
company for so long
again over 30 years that their entire
personal network and friendships are all
within the company
and so after he was laid off he decided
to come back and volunteered and run a
couple of organizations
just sort of in his spare time so what i
got out of that is
it's really important to make friends
have a network
outside the company as well as inside
the company so institutional knowledge
and institutional
networks are very very important but so
are networks outside of your company so
it's really important to establish
industry-wide knowledge this is one of
the major reasons why at launch google
for example we don't
teach really proprietary tools and
vendors
we really try to stick to the open
source products
it's because i don't want you to become
a specialist this early i want you to
have the skills to
move across companies and move across
subfields within
software engineering
so just to summarize my advice for early
career software engineers
remember to have loyalty to people not
companies
know the market periodically interview
or talk to those who are interviewing
even if you're happy even if you're okay
doesn't mean you're gonna jump ship it
just means that you're doing some market
research
and it's okay to keep your resume
updated it helps protect you from
large institutional changes that's out
of your control
as you work try to get to the best
company you can part of it's for pay but
the other part of it is that you meet
other good people and this is going to
be the start of your network
this is probably the number one reason
for
trying to hop on that blue curve just
the type of people you meet
you're gonna meet other ambitious
engineers and two three four five years
down the line
that's your network so collect good
people also think about diversifying
yourself a little bit
there's a lot of married couples at the
same company which is fine
especially if you met at the company but
in my opinion
you might give a little thought to
diversifying yourselves and
go out of your way to connect with
people outside of your company and even
outside of your industry
so one good way where you can achieve a
lot of this you know have a good feel
for the market collect good people
diversify yourself and meeting other
people outside your industry is just
work on
ambitious side projects or work on
popular open source
projects this also has the effect of
building up your resume so that you are
worth more
when the market comes back so this is
advice for early career software
engineers
this is just some numbers i pull from
the united states bureau of labor
statistics this is a number of
programmers i believe there's a number
of software engineers
between 1999 and 2011. you notice the
dip
during the two downturns but you notice
how quickly the number of engineers kind
of
increases almost the year after
immediately
this is not true for every field if you
look at some other fields it just kind
of continuously goes down
so software engineer for the most part
as resilient as any other job role out
there
when it comes to bouncing back from a
downturn
okay let's talk about the second
recession 2007 to 2009
this is in some circles known as the
great recession
and it's the worst downturn since the
great depression
so banks that are a hundred years old
were permanently closed
massive financial crisis and real estate
was
devastated at the time i was working on
my own startup
it was a video interviewing platform and
we were actually closing pretty big name
clients
and for a while we thought we were going
to hit it big
while that was happening i was also
doing a little bit of consulting
for me work wasn't too difficult to get
just because i had prior experience
and tech for the most part didn't feel
like it was impacted as severely as some
of these other industries
through my consulting work i met a lot
of wonderful freelancers and folks who
were
kind of like me didn't want to work for
a big corporation and just wanted to
strike out on their own
i definitely got caught up in the
startup culture and i was pretty much
all in on that
so through my freelancing contacts i
sort of saw what they went through in
this downturn
and what they experienced was that lower
tier freelancing jobs just frankly
disappeared
for example i knew people who were
making well into the six figures
doing nothing more than building a
website you know building like a little
shopping cart feature
for local restaurants for local dentists
and doctors offices
or some small retailers who want an
online presence all of a sudden
when the downturn came these small
businesses
were looking at their costs and saying
well do i really want to pay 200
a month or 500 a month for this person
who
basically changes my phone number or
changes my hours
on my website or updates a photo so they
started looking around and
sure enough you see that there are much
cheaper options and there definitely
were cheaper options
in that there were all these websites
that were coming up like weebly and wix
and shopify
that automated all these features that
these freelancers were doing at the time
so you went in a two-year period went
from making well over six figures to
basically nothing so what i learned from
this from observing this
is that in a downturn the lower tier
jobs are going to be taken away by
automation
or it's just not going to be there as
people
cut non-critical initiatives so that
marketing landing page either we're
gonna use weebly to do it
or we just won't do it we're not gonna
spend two thousand dollars
and have somebody build us a custom one
because all of a sudden
cutting costs on people's minds okay
now that we've talked about the
recession and the downturn a bit let's
map those stories back to this career
transition path remember that blue line
their heads right
the idealized path where they envisioned
this linear progression
and they're trying to just get their
foot in the door but
as i said before the reality the hard
part is actually that
second jump so the main idea i want to
convey with this
slide is that career transitioners are
not correctly perceiving the core
problem they're trying to solve because
the curve actually looks like this
the first jobs they can get will not
take them up the pay scale
in a good economy the danger for career
transitioners is not understanding
what curve they're on and settling for
jobs that aren't very good and doesn't
lead them where they want to go
however in a downturn
the curves just disappear what happened
to those lower
tier salary curves how come they just
disappeared
right as i said before companies are
looking to eliminate cost
companies are looking to eliminate
non-critical initiatives
and so in a downturn you don't even have
a choice
so the advice i gave logical folks
during good times like this
is be ambitious try to hop on that blue
curve
study a little bit more turn down these
low paying jobs
but in a downturn the device is it's
mandatory
if you want a job you have to level up
because the lower tier jobs just don't
exist anymore or they're hyper
competitive so the only solution during
a downturn is to get better is to
improve
there's going to be a contraction it's
what happened my junior year i did
nothing but
make myself better for a whole year it
was very difficult
and this is my advice for people too to
prepare for
a recession as you're transitioning to a
career you're you're just not going to
be able to have this option anymore
so all that doom and gloom being said
salaries in tech for the most part goes
up
so again i pulled this from the u.s
bureau of labor statistics
this is just software engineering roles
so this is only that blue line this is
not
um you know front end developers or
anything like that this is just that
blue lines and i pulled
they broke it down pretty granularly so
i pulled the bottom 10
of that blue line and i pulled the top
90 of that blue line
and mapped the percent change the
percent change
so if it's above zero that means it's
increasing so that's good
and you can see that there was a you
know the percent change decreased a
little bit
twice two little dips here to match sort
of the the two downturns
and the blue actually did below zero so
actually decrease a little bit the
bottom 10 percent of the software engine
rules
decrease a little bit but then it
bounced back nicely
so prepare yourself for the for the
upswing so even though
tech is going to be affected it's not
nearly going to be as effective as other
industries
and other jobs so the next recession
this is very difficult to project right
if if i were to if without the pandemic
i would say
it should be similar to the other ones
where maybe
the increase in salaries decreases a
little bit but there'll still be an
increase
but with a pandemic we'll see there's
just too many unknowns at this point
the world looks like it's going to be a
different place frankly after this
happens
but i believe that tech will be more
important than ever
but even within tech recovery will
heavily depend on
the industry for example retail
restaurants
tourism travel related companies will
likely
experience a more prolonged impact and
if i were to just take some guesses i
know i said i wouldn't pontificate on
big ideas or anything like that but
um if i were to just take some guesses
here i would say remote work will become
more and more normal
in software it's already accepted but i
think it'll actually be
uh even more normalized i think
education is going to be severely
impacted by this
uh k-12 education higher ed for sure
but i also think coding boot camps will
will take a major hit here
as all these lower tier openings just
dry up
and frankly that's where the vast
majority of these coding boot camps
they're driving people to these lower
tier jobs
this is the next one the esports is just
kind of my wild take here um
it's already taken off but i i actually
think it's going to take off even more
and the reason why i say that is because
we have this great sports infrastructure
like espn and all these reporters and
publications and websites and people are
used to checking scores and fantasy
sports
but now we can't play sports and i think
it's just very natural for
esports to step in there and just point
this entire infrastructure at esports
but the last one here may be more
relevant to us you know as uh software
developers as career transitioners is
that
recruiters i think are gonna suffer a
little bit as companies
find it easier to hire good engineers
you know prior to this pandemic
is very very difficult to hire good
engineers as more hit the market
as more get laid off it's going to be a
little bit easier and again companies
are
going to look to cut costs right
recruiters are not
viewed as a profit center most of the
time and so
just like the dentist offices looking
towards weebly to automate
my friends who are freelancing i think
companies will be looking to
cut the cost of recruiters looking to
automate big chunks of that process
so i guess two big themes layoffs and
automation
i'm just gonna point out remote work
here a little bit because
that impacts everybody i do think that
remote work is going to be the
big winner of this pandemic and that
we're forced to work remotely
this is going to be both good and bad
for those of you looking to transition
to this industry
right increased competition for opening
that's bad
and i think that as employers get used
to this idea
of hiring remotely it introduces them to
this idea
of the international marketplace and so
instead of saying well
you have to live in boston because
that's where my office is
maybe they'll start loosing that up a
little bit but then once you do that you
might say well as long as you speak
english well and you work in my time
zone and there's no
intellectual property or legal issues
why not
i don't really care if you're in canada
or south america
or anywhere as long as you can work
during my time zone and you communicate
well
so definitely increasing competition i
think i think remote work will also
exacerbate this
bi-noble distribution of programming
salaries
as specialists will be able to find the
highest paying
roles for their skill set and not only
just work for whoever happens to be
around them
and then competition will actually drive
some of the salaries down to the lower
end
soft skills always important but i think
will be even more valuable for remote
work
those who can communicate well use the
tools
the remote tools to communicate are
going to be a huge advantage
over other candidates just because
remote work
or at least effective remote work really
depends on
effective communication i think it will
introduce new legal issues
we might get into which country owns
what intellectual property as you have
company headquarters in certain
countries and workers in other countries
and i think it'll open up new work
arbitrage opportunities
and i'm reminded of a story a few months
ago or maybe a few years ago of this
person who's working remotely
out of san francisco and he was the top
rated engineer for their company
but it turns out he was basically
offloading his work to
a handful of contractors that's why he
was so productive and he was paying
these contractors
combined like half his salary and they
were you know in a different country or
something like that
so he was just pm me and collecting half
his paycheck he got fired
but all of a sudden when you don't care
about where people live it does open it
up to some work arbitrage opportunities
so final thoughts for career
transitioners
you just have to aim higher right
already talked about this in good times
you're just trying to get on that better
salary curve and downturns
you're still trying to get to the better
salary curve but there's really no
choice and
for early career software engineers just
know the market be interview ready
invest in yourself it's low opportunity
cost be ambitious
collect good people and invest in
yourself and i'll just end it with this
thought
launch goal was built for this when i
say aim higher that's what launch
schools built for
you know i've been working on launch
school for eight years and over the past
eight years
we've been in nothing but a good market
a bull market and pitching what we do at
launch school in a bull market has been
very difficult frankly
i often find myself in a conversation
where i have to convince somebody why
it's important to learn something well
and i just never thought i would have to
do that but it turns out it's super
confusing
just like those curves i showed you it's
very confusing when some when someone
else promises that you can get a job
after a few months
and we're here at launch school saying
hey study with us for a couple years
it'll be worth it
that's just not obvious it's hard to
express that and show that
but launch school is built for this from
the beginning and
part of why it was built for this from
the beginning is because of my personal
experience going through
graduating into a recession and
experiencing all those
you know quite frankly traumatic events
so if you're
not at logical if you're in a program
that is not driving you
far along enough in that x-axis and that
skill access
i would just say be careful watch out
because we're already
far along enough in this pandemic that
you can just see that the recession's
coming it's not no it's no longer an
if it's a win i just want to thank you
for attending this webinar
or watching this video if you're
watching later if you have any follow-up
questions or comments definitely
email hello launchschool.com and i'll
take a few questions
so i have two questions here that are
very similar uh it's around networking
so
does anything really change for applying
for jobs or networking during a
recession
any advice on salary negotiation for new
engineers during a recession
so i would just say negotiation is
something that i always encourage people
to think about but it really depends on
your situation what is your leverage
and i don't think that advice changes in
a recession it's just that your leverage
decreases
but if you have three amazing offers you
should definitely negotiate
even in every session as far as applying
for jobs and networking i don't think
there's any
anything different it's just that your
competition gets fiercer so you have to
stand out more
right there's more competition it's
better competition jobs that maybe
took x amount of effort you could get in
good times and bad times you have to
spend
maybe 2x the amount of effort so i don't
think it's different i think it's about
intensity probably
next question would you recommend
networking while in launch school
yeah i get this question a lot and
usually my suggestion is to
say no and the reason is because when
you make an impression
you don't want to make an impression of
someone who's learning because it's very
hard to break out of that impression
even if you
wait like a year people who met you as a
student sort of always see you as one
especially if you kind of look young and
even if you've been studying really
really hard and have leveled up
leveled up significantly in a year or
even two years
it's just so hard to break through that
first impression so i usually recommend
that law school students
start networking only after they've made
some pretty significant progress and not
network as a student
next question coming from a graduate i
guess that's law school graduates
what are some ways to help folks in your
network and who are struggling
okay this is about a launch graduate
helping
yeah definitely reach out to me there's
lots of ways
you know we have a podcast that's really
good if people haven't heard that make
sure to
subscribe to our our podcast just search
for
launch school in your podcast app or go
to podcast.logical.com so
we have graduates coming on the podcast
i don't know who this is but whoever it
is
you know dm me later uh we'll get you on
the podcast or
yeah there's all these initiatives um
that that uh
that we can pull you in on uh next
question you mentioned that having a
side project is a good idea
could you give an example of kind of
side projects you are talking about
so this is really for people who are
already working i think that context is
really important
so this is not about if you're currently
at logical learning if you're already
working then
hopefully your work gives you some
context for the type of project there
right i don't think i want to prescribe
anything here another good
uh idea is to look at the open source
projects you are using
at work and try to contribute to them
and again i would pick an ambitious one
right not not um not a random side
project
basically anything that's just like
basically crud right that that's
just like a web form that's not gonna
impress anybody it's gotta be
you know far more ambitious than that
next question do you have any thoughts
on overcoming age and work gap bias for
someone who demonstrates excellence
in the launch school program
yeah this is a difficult one to answer
um everyone's
unique and has their own unique
circumstance but in general
if you feel that you have some
disadvantage you you have to
do more to overcome it and do more of
what
you know all the things that you expect
right apply to more
jobs be more vocal write more
so i won't say that you know age
discrimination doesn't exist
all the various discrimination rumors
that you hear are probably true to some
degree
but what can you do right and i think
probably a better answer would be to
know the specific situation you're
dealing with
uh and and then maybe you know i can
prescribe something more specifically
but if it's just kind of generically
like this
you know the generic advice is you you
have to overcome it and there's enough
opportunities in tech
for you to overcome it next question
will the capstone course or the core
curriculum
increase in difficulty uh is
i guess the question is will the
increase in difficulty in reaction to
the
recession or downturn the answer is no
because we we were
aiming here to begin with so and our
courses are always being updated anyway
and so they're they're just gonna
undergo their normal
um updating process but certainly not
because again we we we have been aiming
here the whole time
and like i said before historically it's
been very difficult
to convince people to work harder study
more
study for a longer period because
there's jobs everywhere there's money
everywhere and it's hard to convince
people to turn down money
but during this downturn i feel like
this is where we can say we we've been
trying to do this the whole time
uh next question i when i witnessed
three rounds of layoffs in a previous
job i guess in finance what i noticed
was that the jobs that didn't involve
didn't involve maintaining operations
specifically for the most resistance
resistance to cuts okay so
didn't involve maintenance were
resistant to cuts
jobs like sales engineering marketing
etc were the first on a chopping block
is there equivalent in the software
engineering world
um again it's cost versus profit
so you really have to do some analysis
here and
figure out which departments and
divisions
drive the company right which department
sits in a driver's seat
and again the usual test is how many
monitors can i have
if you're in a profit center they'll say
as many as you want if you're in a cost
center they'll have to well you have to
justify every monitor
you want right next question so given an
opportunity to take a quote foot in the
door
junior dev job would you recommend not
to take that job and instead level up
your skills so that you become
a software engineer and hop on that blue
curve and start from there
whether or not you take a foot in a door
job is up to you
because everyone's personal financial
situation is different
i think my main goal is to express that
such different curves exist and i think
what a lot of people don't realize is
that they take that foot in the door job
they expect that
after a certain amount of time you know
something naturally is going to happen
right in fact what i suggest is usually
you know unless it's a very unique
foot-in-the-door job and it's
really great but usually these
foot-in-the-door jobs
kind of have this like double negative
of being very mentally intensive
and also low-paying it's very chaotic
and
so it doesn't facilitate learning and
you know what i usually recommend is
take a job where you're underemployed
where it's not very mentally intense and
you maybe you're even bored at work
but you know you're not maximizing on
the salary front you could make more
but you're purposefully not in order to
save your mental energy to learn right
so usually that's what i recommend but
whether or not you take a particular job
i think is going to be a personal choice
but i'll just say you know and and every
foot in the door job is different
but just make sure that it's not one of
those foot in the door jobs where
it's chaotic it's messy you're not
learning much it's always fighting fire
just low paying it's mentally draining
i mean that's the worst of all worlds
okay that's all the questions and once
again thank you so much
for attending and for watching and if
you have any other thoughts
just email us at hello logical.com